
--- PAGE 1 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Evan Zheran Liu 1 2 Milad Hashemi 2 Kevin Swersky 2 Parthasarathy Ranganathan 2 Junwhan Ahn 2
Abstract
Program execution speed critically depends on in-
creasing cache hits, as cache hits are orders of
magnitude faster than misses. To increase cache
hits, we focus on the problem of cache replace-
ment: choosing which cache line to evict upon in-
serting a new line. This is challenging because it
requires planning far ahead and currently there is
no known practical solution. As a result, current
replacement policies typically resort to heuris-
tics designed for speciﬁc common access patterns,
which fail on more diverse and complex access
patterns. In contrast, we propose an imitation
learning approach to automatically learn cache
access patterns by leveraging Belady’s, an oracle
policy that computes the optimal eviction decision
given the future cache accesses. While directly
applying Belady’s is infeasible since the future
is unknown, we train a policy conditioned only
on past accesses that accurately approximates Be-
lady’s even on diverse and complex access pat-
terns, and call this approach PARROT . When eval-
uated on 13 of the most memory-intensive SPEC
applications, PARROT increases cache miss rates
by 20% over the current state of the art. In ad-
dition, on a large-scale web search benchmark,
PARROT increases cache hit rates by 61% over a
conventional LRU policy. We release a Gym envi-
ronment to facilitate research in this area, as data
is plentiful, and further advancements can have
signiﬁcant real-world impact.
1. Introduction
Caching is a universal concept in computer systems that
bridges the performance gap between different levels of data
storage hierarchies, found everywhere from databases to op-
erating systems to CPUs (Jouppi, 1990; Harty & Cheriton,
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Cali-
fornia, USA 2Google Research, Sunnyvale, California, USA. Cor-
respondence to: Evan Z. Liu<evanliu@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
Miss
BA C
D A
BA D
Hit
C
BA D
Miss
Cache
Accesses
Evict
Figure 1. Cache replacement. Att = 0, line D is accessed, causing
a cache miss. The replacement policy chooses between lines A,
B, and C in the cache and in this case evicts C. At t = 1, line A
is accessed and is already in the cache, causing a cache hit. No
action from the replacement policy is needed. At t = 2 , line C
is accessed, causing another cache miss. The replacement policy
could have avoided this miss by evicting a different line att = 0.
1992; Xu et al., 2013; Cidon et al., 2016). Correctly select-
ing what data is stored in caches is critical for latency, as
accessing the data directly from the cache (a cache hit) is
orders of magnitude faster than retrieving the data from a
lower level in the storage hierarchy (a cache miss). For ex-
ample, Cidon et al. (2016) show that improving cache hit
rates of web-scale applications by just 1% can decrease to-
tal latency by as much as 35%.
Thus, general techniques for increasing cache hit rates
would signiﬁcantly improve performance at all levels of the
software stack. Broadly, two main avenues for increasing
cache hit rates exist: (i) avoiding future cache misses by
proactively prefetching the appropriate data into the cache
beforehand; and (ii) strategically selecting which data to
evict from the cache when making space for new data (cache
replacement). Simply increasing cache sizes is a tempting
third avenue, but is generally prohibitively expensive.
This work focuses on single-level cache replacement (Fig-
ure 1). When a new block of data (referred to as a line) is
added to the cache (i.e., due to a cache miss), an existing
cache line must be evicted from the cache to make space for
the new line. To do this, during cache misses, a cache re-
placement policy takes as inputs the currently accessed line
and the lines in the cache and outputs which of the cache
lines to evict.
Prior work frequently relies on manually-engineered heuris-
tics to capture the most common cache access patterns, such
as evicting the most recently used (MRU) or least recently
used (LRU) cache lines, or trying to identify the cache lines
arXiv:2006.16239v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jul 2020

--- PAGE 2 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
that are frequently reused vs. those that are not (Qureshi
et al., 2007; Jaleel et al., 2010; Jain & Lin, 2016; Shi et al.,
2019). These heuristics perform well on the speciﬁc simple
access patterns they target, but they only target a small frac-
tion of all possible access patterns, and consequently they
perform poorly on programs with more diverse and complex
access patterns. Current cache replacement policies resort
to heuristics as practical theoretical foundations have not
yet been developed (Beckmann & Sanchez, 2017).
We propose a new approach for learning cache replace-
ment policies by leveraging Belady’s optimal policy (Be-
lady, 1966) in the framework of imitation learning (IL), and
name this approach PARROT .1 Belady’s optimal policy (Be-
lady’s for short) is an oracle policy that computes the the-
oretically optimal cache eviction decision based on knowl-
edge of future cache accesses, which we propose to approxi-
mate with a policy that only conditions on the past accesses.
While our main goal is to establish (imitation) learned re-
placement policies as a proof-of-concept, we note that de-
ploying such learned policies requires solving practical chal-
lenges, e.g., model latency may overshadow gains due to
better cache replacement. We address some of these chal-
lenges in Section 4.5 and highlight promising future direc-
tions in Section 7.
Hawkeye (Jain & Lin, 2016) and Glider (Shi et al., 2019)
were the ﬁrst to propose learning from Belady’s. They train
a binary classiﬁer to predict if a cache line will soon be
reused (cache-friendly) or not (cache-averse), evicting the
cache-averse lines before the cache-friendly ones and re-
lying on a traditional heuristic to determine which lines
are evicted ﬁrst within the cache-friendly and cache-averse
groups. Training such a binary classiﬁer avoids the chal-
lenges (e.g., compounding errors) of directly learning a pol-
icy, but relying on the traditional heuristic heavily limits the
expressivity of the policy class that these methods optimize
over, which prevents them from accurately approximating
Belady’s. In contrast, our work is the ﬁrst to propose cache
replacement as an IL problem, which allows us to directly
train a replacement policy end-to-end over a much more ex-
pressive policy class to approximate Belady’s. This repre-
sents a novel way of leveraging Belady’s and provides a new
framework for learning end-to-end replacement policies.
Concretely, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We cast cache replacement as an imitation learning
problem, leveraging Belady’s in a new way (Section 3).
• We develop a neural architecture for end-to-end cache
replacement and several supervised tasks that further
improve its performance over standard IL (Section 4).
• Our proposed approach, PARROT , exceeds the state-of-
the-art replacement policy’s hit rates by over 20% on
1Parrots are known for their ability to imitate others.
memory-intensive CPU benchmarks. On an industrial-
scale web search workload, PARROT improves cache
hit rates by 61% over a commonly implemented LRU
policy (Section 5).
• We propose cache replacement as a challenging new
IL/RL (reinforcement learning) benchmark involving
dynamically changing action spaces, delayed rewards,
and signiﬁcant real-world impact. To that end, we
release an associated Gym environment (Section 7).
2. Cache Preliminaries
We begin with cache preliminaries before formulating cache
replacement as learning a policy over a Markov decision
process in Section 3. We describe the details relevant to
CPU caches, which we evaluate our approach on, but as
caching is a general concept, our approach can be extended
towards other cache structures as well.
A cache is a memory structure that maintains a portion of
the data from a larger memory. If the desired data is located
in the cache when it is required, this is advantageous, as
smaller memories are faster to access than larger memories.
Provided a memory structure, there is a question of how to
best organize it into a cache. In CPUs, caches operate in
terms of atomic blocks of memory or cache lines (typically
64-bytes large). This is the minimum granularity of data
that can be accessed from the cache.
During a memory access, the cache must be searched for
the requested data. Fully-associative caches layout all data
in a single ﬂat structure, but this is generally prohibitively
expensive, as locating the requested data requires searching
through all data in the cache. Instead, CPU caches are often
W -way set-associative caches of sizeN×W , consisting
ofN cache sets, where each cache set holdsW cache lines
{l1,...,l W}. Each line maps to a particular cache set (typi-
cally determined by the lower order bits of line’s address),
so only theW lines within that set must be searched.
During execution, programs read from and write to memory
addresses by executing load or store instructions. These
load/store instructions have unique identiﬁers known as
program counters (PCs). If the address is located in the
cache, this is called a cache hit. Otherwise, this is a cache
miss, and the data at that address must be retrieved from a
larger memory. Once the data is retrieved, it is generally
added to the appropriate cache set (as recently accessed
lines could be accessed again). Since each cache set can
only hold W lines, if a new line is added to a cache set
already containingW lines, the cache replacement policy
must choose an existing line to replace. This is called a
cache eviction and selecting the optimal line to evict is the
cache replacement problem.

--- PAGE 3 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Belady’s Optimal Policy. Given knowledge of future
cache accesses, Belady’s computes the optimal cache evic-
tion decision. Speciﬁcally, at each timestept, Belady’s com-
putes the reuse distancedt(lw) for each linelw in the cache
set, which is deﬁned as the number of total cache accesses
until the next access tolw. Then, Belady’s chooses to evict
the line with the highest reuse distance, effectively the line
used furthest in the future, i.e., arg maxw=1,...,W dt(lw).
3. Casting Cache Replacement as Imitation
Learning
We cast cache replacement as learning a policy on an
episodic Markov decision process⟨S,As,R,P⟩ in order to
leverage techniques from imitation learning. Speciﬁcally,
the state at thet-th timestepst = (sc
t,sa
t,sh
t )∈S consists
of three components, where:
• sa
t = (mt,pct) is the current cache access, consisting
of the currently accessed cache line addressmt and the
unique program counterpct of the access.
• sc
t ={l1,...,l W} is the cache state consisting of the
W cache line addresses currently in the cache set ac-
cessed bysa
t (the replacement policy does not require
the whole cache state including other cache sets to
make a decision).2
• sh
t = ({m1,...,m t−1},{pc1,...,pc t−1}) is the his-
tory of all past cache accesses. In practice, we effec-
tively only condition on the pastH accesses.
The action setAst available at a state st = (sc
t,sa
t,sh
t ) is
deﬁned as follows: During cache misses, i.e.,mt̸∈sc
t, the
action setAst consists of the integers{1,...,W }, where
actionw corresponds to evicting linelw. Otherwise, during
cache hits, the action set Ast consists of a single no-op
actionano-op, since no line must be evicted.
The transition dynamics P (st+1 | at,st) are given by
the dynamics of the three parts of the state. The dy-
namics of the next cache access sa
t+1 and the cache ac-
cess history sh
t+1 are independent of the action at and
are deﬁned by the program being executed. Speciﬁcally,
the next access sa
t+1 = (mt+1,pct+1) is simply the next
memory address the program accesses and its associated
PC. The t-th access is appended to sh
t+1, i.e., sh
t+1 =
({m1,...,m t−1,mt},{pc1,...,pc t−1,pct}).
The dynamics of the cache state are determined by the ac-
tions taken by the replacement policy. At state st with
sc
t ={l1,...,l W} andsa
t = (mt,pct): A cache hit does
not change the cache state, i.e.,sc
t+1 =sc
t, as the accessed
line is already available in the cache. A cache miss re-
2A cache set can have less than W cache lines for the ﬁrst
W− 1 cache accesses (small fraction of program execution). In
this case, no eviction is needed to insert the line.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Window Size
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Figure 2. Normalized cache hit rates of Belady’s vs. the number of
accesses it looks into the future. Achieving 80% the performance
of Belady’s with an inﬁnite window size requires accurately com-
puting reuse distances for lines 2600 accesses into the future.
places the selected line with the newly accessed line, i.e.,
sc
t+1 ={l1,...,l w−1,lw+1,...,l W,mt} whereat =w.
The rewardR(st) is 0 for a cache miss (i.e.,mt̸∈sc
t) and
is 1 otherwise for a cache hit. The goal is to learn a policy
πθ(at|st) that maximizes the undiscounted total number
of cache hits (the reward),∑T
t=0R(st), for a sequence of
T cache accesses (m1,pc 1),..., (mT,pcT ).
In this paper, we formulate this task as an imitation learning
problem. During training, we can compute the optimal pol-
icy (Belady’s)π∗(at| st, (mt+1,pct+1),..., (mT,pcT )),
by leveraging that the future accesses are ﬁxed. Then, our
approach learns a policyπθ(at|st) to approximate the op-
timal policy without using the future accesses, as future ac-
cesses are unknown during test time.
To demonstrate the difﬁculty of the problem, Figure 2
shows the amount of future information required to match
the performance of Belady’s on a common computer ar-
chitecture benchmark ( omnetpp, Section 5). We com-
pute this by imposing a future window of size x on
Belady’s, which we call Beladyx, Within the window
(reuse distances≤ x), Beladyx observes exact reuse dis-
tances, and sets the reuse distances of the remaining cache
lines (with reuse distance>x ) to∞. Then, Beladyx evicts
the line with the highest reuse distance, breaking ties ran-
domly. The cache hit rate of Beladyx is plotted on the y-
axis, normalized so that 0 and 1 correspond to the cache hit
rate of LRU and Belady∞ (the normal unconstrained ver-
sion of Belady’s), respectively. As the ﬁgure shows, a sig-
niﬁcant amount of future information is required to fully
match Belady’s performance.
4. PARROT : Learning to Imitate Belady’s
4.1. Model and Training Overview
Model. Below, we overview the basic architecture of the
PARROT policyπθ(at|st) (Figure 3), which draws on the

--- PAGE 4 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
keys
LSTM
Linear + Softmax
...
...
...
query
access history current access
cache state
Figure 3. Neural architecture of PARROT .
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and BiDAF (Seo et al.,
2016) architectures. See Appendix A for the full details.
1. Embed the current cache accesssa
t = (mt,pct) to ob-
tain memory address embeddinge(mt) and PC embed-
dinge(pct) and pass them through an LSTM to obtain
cell statect and hidden stateht:
ct,ht = LSTM([e(mt);e(pct)],ct−1,ht−1)
2. Keep the pastH hidden states, [ht−H+1,...,h t], rep-
resenting an embedding of the cache access historysh
t
and current cache accesssa
t .
3. Form a contextgw for each cache linelw in the cache
statesc
t by embedding each line ase(lw) and attending
over the pastH hidden states withe(lw):
gw = Attention(Q,K )
where queryQ =e(lw), keysK = [ht−H+1,...,h t]
4. Apply a ﬁnal dense layer and softmax on top of these
line contexts to obtain the policy:
πθ(at =w|st) = softmax(dense(gw))
5. Choose arg maxa∈Astπθ(a|st) as the replacement
action to take at timestept.
Training. Algorithm 1 summarizes the training algorithm
for the PARROT policyπθ. The high-level strategy is to visit
a set of statesB and then update the parametersθ to make
the same eviction decision as the optimal policyπ∗ on each
states∈B via the loss functionLθ(s,π∗).
First, we convert a given sequence of consecutive cache
accesses (m1,pc 1),..., (mT,pcT ) into states s0,...,s T
(Section 4.2), on which we can compute the optimal action
with Belady’s (lines 3–5). Given the states, we trainPARROT
with truncated backpropagation through time (lines 6–9).
We sample batches of consecutive states sl−H,...,s l+H
and initialize the LSTM hidden state of our policy on
the cache accesses of sl−H tosl−1. Then, we apply our
replacement policy πθ to each of the remaining states
Algorithm 1 PARROT training algorithm
1: Initialize policy πθ
2: for step = 0 toK do
3: if step≡ 0 (mod 5000) then
4: Collect data set of visited states B ={st}T
t=0 by
followingπθ on all accesses (m1,pc 1),..., (mT,pcT )
5: end if
6: Sample contiguous accesses {st}l+H
t=l−H fromB
7: Warm up policy πθ on initialH accesses
(ml−H,pcl−H ),..., (ml,pcl)
8: Compute loss L = ∑l+H
t=l Lθ(st,π ∗)
9: Update policy parameters θ based on lossL
10: end for
sl,...,s l+H−1 in order to compute the lossLθ(st,π∗) (Sec-
tions 4.3 and 4.4), which encourages the learned replace-
ment policy to make the same decisions as Belady’s.
4.2. A voiding Compounding Errors
Since we are only given the cache accesses and not the states,
we must determine which replacement policy to follow on
these cache accesses to obtain the states B. Naively, one
natural policy to follow is the optimal policyπ∗. However,
this leads to compounding errors (Ross et al., 2011; Daum´e
et al., 2009; Bengio et al., 2015), where the distribution of
states seen during test time (when following the learned
policy) differs from the distribution of states seen during
training (when following the oracle policy). At test time,
since PARROT learns an imperfect approximation of the
oracle policy, it will eventually make a mistake and evict a
suboptimal cache line. This leads to cache states that are
different from those seen during training, which the learned
policy has not trained on, leading to further mistakes.
To address this problem, we leverage the DAgger algo-
rithm (Ross et al., 2011). DAgger avoids compounding er-
rors by also following the current learned policyπθ instead
of the oracle policyπ∗ to collectB during training, which
forces the distribution of training states to match that of test
states. As PARROT updates the policy, the current policy
becomes increasingly different from the policy used to col-
lectB, causing the training state distributionB to drift from
the test state distribution. To mitigate this, we periodically
updateB every 5000 parameter updates by recollectingB
again under the current policy. Based on the recommenda-
tion in (Ross et al., 2011), we follow the oracle policy the
ﬁrst time we collectB, since at that point, the policyπθ is
still random and likely to make poor eviction decisions.
Notably, this approach is possible because we can compute
our oracle policy (Belady’s) at any state during training, as
long as the future accesses are known. This differs from
many IL tasks (Hosu & Rebedea, 2016; Vecerik et al., 2017),
where querying the expert is expensive and limited.

--- PAGE 5 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
4.3. Ranking Loss
Once the statesB are collected, we update our policyπθ to
better approximate Belady’sπ∗ on these states via the loss
functionLθ(s,π∗). A simple log-likelihood (LL) behavior
cloning loss (Pomerleau, 1989)Lθ(s,π∗) = log πθ(π∗(s)|
s) encourages the learned policy to place probability mass
on the optimal actionπ∗(s). However, in the setting where
the distributionπ∗(a|s) is known, instead of just the opti-
mal actionπ∗(s), optimizing to match this distribution can
provide more supervision, similar to the intuition of distil-
lation (Hinton et al., 2015). Thus, we propose an alternate
ranking loss to leverage this additional supervision.
Concretely, PARROT uses a differentiable approxima-
tion (Qin et al., 2010) of normalized discounted cumulative
gain (NDCG) with reuse distance as the relevancy metric:
Lrank
θ (st,π∗) =− DCG
IDCG
where DCG =
W∑
w=1
dt(lw)− 1
log(pos(lw) + 1)
pos(lw) =
∑
i̸=w
σ(−α(πθ(i|st)−πθ(w|st)).
Here, pos(lw) is a differentiable approximation of the rank
of linelw, ranked by how much probability the policy πθ
places on evicting lw, where α = 10 is a hyperparameter
andσ is the sigmoid function. IDCG is a normalization
constant set so that−1≤L rank
θ ≤ 0, equal to the value of
DCG when the policyπθ correctly places probability mass
on the lines in descending order of reuse distance. This
loss function improves cache hit rates by heavily penalizing
πθ for placing probability on lines with low reuse distance,
which will likely lead to cache misses, and only lightly
penalizingπθ for placing probability on lines with higher
reuse distance, which are closer to being optimal and are
less likely to lead to cache misses.
Optimizing our loss function is similar to optimizing the
Kullback-Liebler (KL) divergence (Kullback & Leibler,
1951) between a smoothed version of Belady’s, which evicts
linelw with probability proportional to its exponentiated
reuse distanceedt(lw), and our policyπθ. Directly optimiz-
ing the KL between the non-smoothed oracle policy and our
policy just recovers the normal LL loss, since Belady’s actu-
ally places all of its probability on a single line.
4.4. Predicting Reuse Distance
To add further supervision during training, we propose to
predict the reuse distances of each cache line as an auxiliary
task (Jaderberg et al., 2016; Mirowski et al., 2016; Lam-
ple & Chaplot, 2017). Concretely, we add a second fully-
connected head on PARROT ’s network that takes as inputs
the per-line context embeddingsgw and outputs predictions
C5
12
Byte 1
...0x A1
Byte 2 Byte 3
Linear Layer
embedding
Address / PC
Figure 4. Byte embedder, taking only a few kilobytes of memory.
of the log-reuse distance ˆd(gw). We train this head with a
mean-squared error lossLreuse
θ (s,π∗) = 1
W
∑W
w=1( ˆd(gw)−
logdt(lw))2. Intuitively, since the reuse distance predicting
head shares the same body as the policy headπθ, learning
to predict reuse distances helps learn better representations
in the rest of the network. Overall, we train our policy with
lossLθ(s,π∗) =Lrank
θ (s,π∗) +Lreuse
θ (s,π∗).
4.5. Towards Practicality
The goal of this work is to establish directly imitating Be-
lady’s as a proof-of-concept. Applying approaches likePAR-
ROT to real-world systems requires reducing model size and
latency to prevent overshadowing improved cache replace-
ment. We leave these challenges to future work, but high-
light one way to reduce model size in this section, and dis-
cuss further promising directions in Section 7.
In the full-sized PARROT model, we learn a separate embed-
ding for each PC and memory address, akin to word vec-
tors (Mikolov et al., 2013) in natural language processing.
While this approach performs well, these embeddings can re-
quire tens of megabytes to store for real-world programs that
access hundreds of thousands of unique memory addresses.
To reduce model size, we propose learning a byte embed-
der shared across all memory addresses, only requiring sev-
eral kilobytes of storage. This byte embedder embeds each
memory address (or PC) by embedding each byte separately
and then passing a small linear layer over their concatenated
outputs (Figure 4). In principle, this can learn a hierarchical
representation, that separately represents large memory re-
gions (upper bytes of an address) and ﬁner-grained objects
(lower bytes).
5. Experiments
5.1. Experimental Setup
Following Shi et al. (2019), we evaluate our approach on a
three-level cache hierarchy with a 4-way 32 KB L1 cache,
a 8-way 256 KB L2 cache, and a 16-way 2 MB last-level
cache. We apply our approach to the last-level cache while
using the LRU replacement policy for L1/L2 caches.

--- PAGE 6 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
For benchmark workloads, we evaluate on the memory-
intensive SPEC CPU2006 (Henning, 2006) applications
used by Shi et al. (2019). In addition, we evaluate on Google
Web Search, an industrial-scale application that serves bil-
lions of queries per day, to further evaluate the effectiveness
of PARROT on real-world applications with complex access
patterns and large working sets.
For each of these programs, we run them and collect raw
memory access traces over a 50 second interval using dy-
namic binary instrumentation tools (Bruening et al., 2003).
This produces the sequence of all memory accesses that the
program makes during that interval. Last-level cache access
traces are obtained from this sequence by passing the raw
memory accesses through the L1 and L2 caches using an
LRU replacement policy.
As this produces a large amount of data, we then sample the
resultant trace for our training data (Qureshi et al., 2007).
We randomly choose 64 sets and collect the accesses to those
sets on the last-level cache, totaling an average of about 5M
accesses per program. Concretely, this yields a sequence
of accesses (m1,pc 1),..., (mT,pcT ). We train replacement
policies on the ﬁrst 80% of this sequence, validate on the
next 10%, and report test results on the ﬁnal 10%.
Our evaluation focuses on two key metrics representing the
efﬁciency of cache replacement policies. First, as increasing
cache hit rates is highly correlated to decreasing program
latency (Qureshi et al., 2007; Shi et al., 2019; Jain & Lin,
2016), we evaluate our policies using raw cache hit rates.
Second, we report normalized cache hit rates, representing
the gap between LRU (the most common replacement pol-
icy) and Belady’s (the optimal replacement policy). For a
policy with hit rate r, we deﬁne the normalized cache hit
rate as (r−rLRU)
(ropt−rLRU), where rLRU andropt are the hit rates
of LRU and Belady’s, respectively. The normalized hit rate
represents the effectiveness of a given policy with respect to
the two baselines, LRU (normalized hit rate of 0) and Be-
lady’s (normalized hit rate of 1).
We compare the following four approaches:
1. PARROT : trained with the full-sized model, learning a
separate embedding for each PC and address.
2. PARROT (byte): trained with the much smaller byte
embedder (Section 4.5).
3. Glider (Shi et al., 2019): the state-of-the-art cache
replacement policy, based on the results reported in
their paper.
4. Nearest Neighbor: a nearest neighbors version of Be-
lady’s, which ﬁnds the longest matching PC and mem-
ory address sufﬁx in the training data and follows the
Belady’s decision of that.
The SPEC2006 program accesses we evaluate on may
slightly differ from those used by Shi et al. (2019) in evalu-
ating Glider, as the latter is not publicly available. However,
to ensure a fair comparison, we veriﬁed that the measured
hit rates for LRU and Belady’s on our cache accesses are
close to the numbers reported by Shi et al. (2019), and we
only compare on normalized cache hit rates. Since Glider’s
hit rates are not available on Web Search, we compare PAR-
ROT against LRU, the policy frequently used in production
CPU caches. The reported hit rates for PARROT , LRU, Be-
lady’s, and Nearest Neighbors are measured on the test sets.
We apply early stopping on PARROT , based on the cache hit
rate on the validation set. For PARROT , we report results
averaged over 3 random seeds, using the same minimally-
tuned hyperparameters in all domains. These hyperparame-
ters were tuned exclusively on the validation set of omnetpp
(full details in Appendix B).
5.2. Main Results
Table 1 compares the raw cache hit rate ofPARROT with that
of Belady’s and LRU. PARROT achieves signiﬁcantly higher
cache hit rates than LRU on every program, ranging from
2% to 30%. Averaged over all programs, PARROT achieves
16% higher cache hit rates than LRU. According to prior
study on cache sensitivity of SPEC2006 workloads (Jaleel,
2010), achieving the same level of cache hit rates asPARROT
with LRU would require increasing the cache capacity by
2–3x (e.g., omnetpp and mcf) to 16x (e.g., libquantum).
On the Web Search benchmark, PARROT achieves a 61%
higher normalized cache hit rate and 13.5% higher raw
cache hit rate than LRU, demonstrating PARROT ’s practical
ability to scale to the complex memory access patterns found
in datacenter-scale workloads.
Figure 5 compares the normalized cache hit rates of PAR-
ROT and Glider. With the full-sized model, PARROT outper-
forms Glider on 10 of the 13 SPEC2006 programs, achiev-
ing a 20% higher normalized cache hit rate averaged over
all programs; on the remaining 3 programs (bzip, bwaves,
and mcf), Glider performs marginally better. Additionally,
PARROT achieves consistent performance with low variance
across seeds.
Reducing model size. Though learning PARROT from
scratch with the byte embedder does not perform as well
as the full-sized model, the byte embedder model is signif-
icantly smaller and still achieves an average of 8% higher
normalized cache hit rate than Glider (Figure 5). In Sec-
tion 7, we highlight promising future directions to reduce the
performance gap and further reduce model size and latency.
Generalization. An effective cache replacement policy
must be able to generalize to unseen code paths (i.e., se-
quences of accesses) from the same program, as there are
exponentially many code paths and encountering them all

--- PAGE 7 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Table 1. Raw cache hit rates. Optimal is the hit rate of Belady’s. Averaged over all programs,PARROT (3 seeds) outperforms LRU by 16%.
astar bwaves bzip cactusadm gems lbm leslie3d libq mcf milc omnetpp sphinx3 xalanc Web Search
Optimal 43.5% 8.7% 78.4% 38.8% 26.5% 31.3% 31.9% 5.8% 46.8% 2.4% 45.1% 38.2% 33.3% 67.5%
LRU 20.0% 4.5% 56.1% 7.4% 9.9% 0.0% 12.7% 0.0% 25.3% 0.1% 26.1% 9.5% 6.6% 45.5%
PARROT 34.4% 7.8% 64.5% 38.6% 26.0% 30.8% 31.7% 5.4% 41.4% 2.1% 41.4% 36.7% 30.4% 59.0%
astar bwaves bzip cactusadm gems lbm leslie3d libq mcf milc omnetpp sphinx3 xalanc Web Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Oracle Glider Parrot Parrot (byte) Nearest Neighbor
Figure 5. Comparison of PARROT with the state-of-the-art replacement policy, Glider. We evaluate two versions ofPARROT , the full-sized
model (PARROT ) and the byte embedder model (PARROT (byte)), and report the mean performance over 3 seeds with 1-standard deviation
error bars. On the SPEC2006 programs (left), PARROT with the full-sized model improves hit rates over Glider by 20% on average.
during training is infeasible. We test PARROT ’s ability to
generalize to new code paths by comparing it to the nearest
neighbors baseline (Figure 5). The performance of the near-
est neighbors baseline shows that merely memorizing train-
ing code paths seen achieves near-optimal cache hit rates on
simpler programs (e.g., gems, lbm), which just repeatedly
execute the same code paths, but fails for more complex pro-
grams (e.g., mcf, Web Search), which exhibit highly varied
code paths. In contrast, PARROT maintains high cache hit
rates even on these more complex programs, showing that it
can generalize to new code paths not seen during training.
Additionally, some of the programs require generalizing to
new memory addresses and program counters at test time.
In mcf, 21.6% of the test-time memory addresses did not
appear in the training data, and in Web Search, 5.3% of the
test-time memory addresses and 6% of the test-time PCs did
not appear in the training data (full details in Appendix B),
but PARROT performs well despite this.
5.3. Ablations
Below, we ablate each of the following from PARROT : pre-
dicting reuse distance, on-policy training (DAgger), and
ranking loss. We evaluate on four of the most memory-
intensive SPEC2006 applications (lbm, libq, mcf, and om-
netpp) and Web Search and compare each ablation with
Glider, Belady’s, and two versions of PARROT . PARROT is
the full-sized model with no ablations. PARROT (base) is
PARROT ’s neural architecture, with all three additions ab-
lated. Comparing PARROT (base) to Glider (e.g., Figure 6)
shows that in some programs (e.g., omnetpp and lbm), sim-
ply casting cache replacement as an IL problem with PAR-
ROT’s neural architecture is sufﬁcient to obtain competitive
performance, while in other programs, our additions are re-
quired to achieve state-of-the-art cache hit rates.
lbm libq mcf omnetpp Web Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Oracle
Glider
Parrot (base)
Parrot (evict highest reuse dist.)
Parrot (reuse dist. aux loss)
Parrot (no reuse dist.)
Parrot
Figure 6. Comparison between different mechanisms of incorpo-
rating reuse distance into PARROT . Including reuse distance pre-
diction in our full model ( PARROT ) achieves 16.8% higher nor-
malized cache hit rates than ablating reuse distance prediction
(PARROT (no reuse dist.)).
Predicting Reuse Distance. Figure 6 compares the fol-
lowing three conﬁgurations to show the effect of incorpo-
rating reuse distance information: (i) PARROT (no reuse
dist.), where reuse distance prediction is ablated, (ii) PAR-
ROT (evict highest reuse dist.), where our fully ablated
model (PARROT (base)) predicts reuse distance and directly
evicts the line with the highest predicted reuse distance, and
(iii) PARROT (reuse dist. aux loss), where our fully ablated
model learns to predict reuse distance as an auxiliary task.
Comparing PARROT (no reuse dist.) to PARROT shows that
incorporating reuse distance greatly improves cache hit rates.
Between different ways to incorporate reuse distance into
PARROT , using reuse distance prediction indirectly as an
auxiliary loss function (PARROT (reuse dist. aux loss)) leads
to higher cache hit rates than using the reuse distance pre-
dictor directly to choose which cache line to evict (PARROT
(evict highest reuse dist.)). We hypothesize that in some
cache states, accurately predicting the reuse distance for
each line may be challenging, but ranking the lines may
be relatively easy. Since our reuse distance predictor pre-
dicts log reuse distances, small errors may drastically affect
which line is evicted when the reuse distance predictor is
used directly.

--- PAGE 8 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
lbm libq mcf omnetpp Web Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Oracle
Glider
Parrot (base)
Parrot (oﬀ-policy)
Parrot
Figure 7. Ablation study for training with DAgger. Training with
DAgger achieves 9.8% higher normalized cache hit rates than
training off-policy on the states visited by the oracle policy.
lbm libq mcf omnetpp Web Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Oracle
Glider
Parrot (base)
Parrot (no ranking loss)
Parrot
Figure 8. Ablation study for our ranking loss. Using our ranking
loss improves normalized cache hit rate by 3.5% over a LL loss.
Training with DAgger . Figure 7 summarizes the results
when ablating training on-policy with DAgger. In theory,
training off-policy on roll-outs of Belady’s should lead to
compounding errors, as the states visited during training un-
der Belady’s differ from those visited during test time. Em-
pirically, we observe that this is highly program-dependent.
In some programs, like mcf or Web Search, training off-
policy performs as well or better than training on-policy,
but in other programs, training on-policy is crucial. Over-
all, training on-policy leads to an average 9.8% normalized
cache hit rate improvement over off-policy training.
Ranking Loss. Figure 8 summarizes the results when ab-
lating our ranking loss. Using our ranking loss over a log-
likelihood (LL) loss introduces some bias, as the true op-
timal policy places all its probability on the line with the
highest reuse distance. However, our ranking loss better op-
timizes cache hit rates, as it more heavily penalizes evict-
ing lines with lower reuse distances, which lead to misses.
In addition, a distillation perspective of our loss, where the
teacher network is an exponentially-smoothed version of
Belady’s with the probability of evicting a line set as propor-
tional to exp(reuse distance), suggests that our ranking loss
provides greater supervision than LL. Tuning a temperature
on the exponential smoothing of Belady’s could interpolate
between less bias and greater supervision. Empirically, we
observe that our ranking loss leads to an average 3.5% nor-
malized cache hit rate improvement over LL.
5.4. History Length
One key question is: how much past information is needed
to accurately approximate Belady’s? We study this by vary-
ing the number of past accesses that PARROT attends over
lbm libq mcf omnetpp Web Search
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Cache Hit Rate
Oracle
Glider
Parrot (H = 20)
Parrot (H = 40)
Parrot (H = 60)
Parrot (H = 80)
Parrot (H = 100)
Parrot (H = 120)
Parrot (H = 140)
Figure 9. Performance of PARROT trained with different numbers
of past accesses (H). As the number of past accesses increases,
normalized cache hit rates improve, until reaching a history length
of 80. At that point, additional past accesses have little impact.
(H) from 20 to 140. In theory, PARROT ’s LSTM hidden
state could contain information about all past accesses, but
the LSTM’s memory is limited in practice.
The results are summarized in Figure 9. We observe that
the past accesses become an increasingly better predictor
of the future as the number past accesses increase, until
about 80. After that point, more past information doesn’t
appear to help approximate Belady’s. Interestingly, Shi et al.
(2019) show that Glider experiences a similar saturation in
improvement from additional past accesses, but at around
30 past accesses. This suggests that learning a replacement
policy end-to-end with PARROT can effectively leverage
more past information than simply predicting whether a
cache line is cache-friendly or cache-averse.
6. Related Work
Cache Replacement. Traditional approaches to cache re-
placement rely on heuristics built upon intuition for cache
access behavior. LRU is based on the assumption that most
recently used lines are more likely to be reused. More so-
phisticated policies target a handful of manually classiﬁed
access patterns based on simple counters (Qureshi et al.,
2007; Jaleel et al., 2010) or try to predict instructions that
tend to load zero-reuse lines based on a table of saturating
counters (Wu et al., 2011; Khan et al., 2010).
Several recent approaches instead focus on learning cache
replacement policies. Wang et al. (2019) also cast cache
replacement as learning over a Markov decision process, but
apply reinforcement learning instead of imitation learning,
which results in lower performance. More closely related
to ours are Hawkeye (Jain & Lin, 2016) and Glider (Shi
et al., 2019), which also learn from Belady’s. They train
a binary classiﬁcation model based on Belady’s to predict
if a line is cache-friendly or cache-averse, but rely on a
traditional replacement heuristic to determine which line to
evict when several lines are cache-averse. Relying on the
traditional heuristic to produce the ﬁnal eviction decisions
heavily constrains the expressivity of the policy class they
learn over, so that even the best policy within their class of
learnable policies may not accurately approximate Belady’s,
yielding high cache miss rates for some access patterns.

--- PAGE 9 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
In contrast, our work is the ﬁrst to propose learning a
cache replacement policy end-to-end with imitation learn-
ing. Framing cache replacement in this principled frame-
work is important as much prior research has resorted to
heuristics for hill climbing speciﬁc benchmarks. In addition,
learning end-to-end enables us to optimize over a highly ex-
pressive policy class, achieving high cache hit rates even on
complex and diverse access patterns.
Imitation Learning. Our work builds on imitation learn-
ing (IL) techniques (Ross & Bagnell, 2014; Sun et al., 2017),
where the goal is to approximate an expert policy. Our set-
ting exhibits two distinctive properties: First, in our setting,
the expert policy (Belady’s) can be queried at any state dur-
ing training. the oracle policy (Belady’s) can be cheaply
queried at any state during training, which differs from a
body of IL work (Vecerik et al., 2017; Hosu & Rebedea,
2016; Hester et al., 2018) focusing on learning with lim-
ited samples from an expensive expert (e.g., a human). The
ability to arbitrarily query the oracle enables us to avoid
compounding errors with DAgger (Ross et al., 2011). Sec-
ond, the distribution over actions of the oracle policy is
available, enabling more sophisticated loss functions. Prior
work (Sabour et al., 2018; Choudhury et al., 2017) also stud-
ies settings with these two properties, although in different
domains. Sabour et al. (2018) shows that an approximate
oracle can be computed in some natural-language sequence
generation tasks; Choudhury et al. (2017) learns to imitate
an oracle computed from data only available during train-
ing, similar to Belady’s, which requires future information.
7. Conclusion and Future Directions
We develop a foundation for learning end-to-end cache re-
placement policies with imitation learning, which signif-
icantly bridges the gap between prior work and Belady’s
optimal replacement policy. Although we evaluate our ap-
proach on CPU caches, due to the popularity of SPEC2006
as a caching benchmark, we emphasize that our approach
applies to other caches as well, such as software caches,
databases, and operating systems. Software caches may be
an especially promising area for applying our approach, as
they tolerate higher latency in the replacement policy and
implementing more complex replacement policies is easier
in software. We highlight two promising future directions:
First, this work focuses on the ML challenges of training a
replacement to approximate Belady’s and does not explore
the practicality of deploying the learned policy in produc-
tion, where the two primary concerns are the memory and la-
tency overheads of the policy. To address these concerns, fu-
ture work could investigate model-size reduction techniques,
such as distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), pruning (Janowsky,
1989; Han et al., 2015; Sze et al., 2017), and quantization,
as well as domains tolerating greater latency and memory
use, such as software caches. Additionally, cache replace-
ment decisions can be made at any time between misses to
the same set, which provides a reasonably long latency win-
dow (e.g., on the order of seconds for software caches) for
our replacement policy to make a decision. Furthermore,
the overall goal of cache replacement is to minimize latency.
While minimizing cache misses minimizes latency to a ﬁrst
approximation, cache misses incur variable amounts of la-
tency (Qureshi et al., 2006), which could be addressed by
ﬁne-tuning learned policies to directly minimize latency via
reinforcement learning.
Second, while Belady’s algorithm provides an optimal re-
placement policy for a single-level cache, there is no known
optimal policy for multiple levels of caches (as is common
in CPUs and web services). This hierarchical cache replace-
ment policy is a ripe area for deep learning and RL research,
as is exploring the connection between cache replacement
and prefetching, as they both involve selecting the optimal
set of lines to be present in the cache. Cache replacement
is backward looking (based on the accesses so far) while
prefetching is forward looking (predicting future accesses
directly (Hashemi et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2020)).
To facilitate further research in this area, we release a Gym
environment for cache replacement, which easily extends
to the hierarchical cache replacement setting, where RL is
required as the optimal policy is unknown. We ﬁnd cache
replacement an attractive problem for the RL/IL communi-
ties, as it has signiﬁcant real-world impact and data is highly
available, in contrast to many current benchmarks that only
have one of these two properties. In addition, cache replace-
ment features several interesting challenges: rewards are
highly delayed, as evicting a particular line may not lead
to a cache hit/miss until thousands of timesteps later; the
semantics of the action space dynamically changes, as the
replacement policy chooses between differing cache lines
at different states; the state space is large (e.g., 100,000s of
unique addresses) and some programs require generalizing
to new memory addresses at test time, not seen during train-
ing, similar to the rare words problem (Luong et al., 2014)
in NLP; and as our ablations show, different programs ex-
hibit wildly different cache access patterns, which can re-
quire different techniques to address. In general, we observe
that computer systems exhibit many interesting machine
learning (ML) problems, but have been relatively inacces-
sible to the ML community because they require sophisti-
cated systems tools. We take steps to avoid this by releasing
our cache replacement environment.
Reproducibility. Code for PARROT and our cache
replacement Gym environment is available at
https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/cache_
replacement.

--- PAGE 10 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Acknowledgements
We thank Zhan Shi for insightful discussions and for provid-
ing the results for Glider, which we compare against. We
also thank Chelsea Finn, Lisa Lee, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh
for their comments on a draft of this paper. Finally, we thank
the anonymous ICML reviewers for their useful feedback,
which helped improve this paper.
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1656518.
References
Beckmann, N. and Sanchez, D. Maximizing cache perfor-
mance under uncertainty. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Symposium on High Performance Computer Archi-
tecture, 2017.
Belady, L. A. A study of replacement algorithms for a
virtual-storage computer. IBM Systems Journal, 1966.
Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. Sched-
uled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neu-
ral networks. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pp. 1171–1179, 2015.
Bruening, D., Garnett, T., and Amarasinghe, S. An infras-
tructure for adaptive dynamic optimization. In Proceed-
ings of the International Symposium on Code Generation
and Optimization, 2003.
Choudhury, S., Kapoor, A., Ranade, G., Scherer, S., and
Dey, D. Adaptive information gathering via imitation
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.07834, 2017.
Cidon, A., Eisenman, A., Alizadeh, M., and Katti, S.
Cliffhanger: Scaling performance cliffs in web memory
caches. In Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation, 2016.
Daum´e, H., Langford, J., and Marcu, D. Search-based
structured prediction. Machine Learning, 75(3):297–325,
2009.
Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y . Understanding the difﬁculty of
training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the thirteenth international conference on artiﬁ-
cial intelligence and statistics, pp. 249–256, 2010.
Han, S., Mao, H., and Dally, W. J. Deep compres-
sion: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning,
trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
Harty, K. and Cheriton, D. R. Application-controlled physi-
cal memory using external page-cache management. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Architec-
tural Support for Programming Languages and Operat-
ing Systems, 1992.
Hashemi, M., Swersky, K., Smith, J. A., Ayers, G., Litz, H.,
Chang, J., Kozyrakis, C., and Ranganathan, P. Learning
memory access patterns. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Henning, J. L. SPEC CPU2006 benchmark descriptions.
ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 34(4):1–
17, 2006.
Hester, T., Vecerik, M., Pietquin, O., Lanctot, M., Schaul,
T., Piot, B., Horgan, D., Quan, J., Sendonaris, A., Os-
band, I., et al. Deep Q-learning from demonstrations. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, 2018.
Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., and Dean, J. Distilling
the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Hosu, I.-A. and Rebedea, T. Playing Atari games with
deep reinforcement learning and human checkpoint re-
play. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05077, 2016.
Jaderberg, M., Mnih, V ., Czarnecki, W. M., Schaul, T.,
Leibo, J. Z., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Reinforce-
ment learning with unsupervised auxiliary tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.05397, 2016.
Jain, A. and Lin, C. Back to the future: Leveraging Be-
lady’s algorithm for improved cache replacement. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, 2016.
Jaleel, A. Memory characterization of workloads us-
ing instrumentation-driven simulation. Web Copy:
http://www.glue.umd.edu/ajaleel/workload, 2010.
Jaleel, A., Theobald, K. B., Steely, S. C., and Emer, J. High
performance cache replacement using re-reference inter-
val prediction (RRIP). In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2010.
Janowsky, S. A. Pruning versus clipping in neural networks.
Physical Review A, 39(12):6600, 1989.
Jouppi, N. P. Improving direct-mapped cache performance
by the addition of a small fully-associative cache and
prefetch buffers. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture
News, 1990.
Khan, S. M., Tian, Y ., and Jimenez, D. A. Sampling dead
block prediction for last-level caches. In Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2010.

--- PAGE 11 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Kullback, S. and Leibler, R. A. On information and sufﬁ-
ciency. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22(1):79–
86, 1951.
Lample, G. and Chaplot, D. S. Playing FPS games with
deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017.
Luong, M.-T., Sutskever, I., Le, Q. V ., Vinyals, O., and
Zaremba, W. Addressing the rare word problem in neural
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8206 ,
2014.
Luong, M.-T., Pham, H., and Manning, C. D. Effective
approaches to attention-based neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., and
Dean, J. Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, pp. 3111–3119, 2013.
Mirowski, P., Pascanu, R., Viola, F., Soyer, H., Ballard,
A. J., Banino, A., Denil, M., Goroshin, R., Sifre, L.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., et al. Learning to navigate in complex
environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03673, 2016.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga,
L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison,
M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L.,
Bai, J., and Chintala, S. PyTorch: An imperative style,
high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 8024–8035,
2019.
Pomerleau, D. A. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle
in a neural network. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 305–313, 1989.
Qin, T., Liu, T.-Y ., and Li, H. A general approximation
framework for direct optimization of information retrieval
measures. Information Retrieval, 13(4):375–397, 2010.
Qureshi, M. K., Lynch, D. N., Mutlu, O., and Patt, Y . N. A
case for mlp-aware cache replacement. In 33rd Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA’06),
pp. 167–178. IEEE, 2006.
Qureshi, M. K., Jaleel, A., Patt, Y . N., Steely, S. C., and
Emer, J. Adaptive insertion policies for high performance
caching. In Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Computer Architecture, 2007.
Ross, S. and Bagnell, J. A. Reinforcement and imitation
learning via interactive no-regret learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1406.5979, 2014.
Ross, S., Gordon, G., and Bagnell, D. A reduction of imita-
tion learning and structured prediction to no-regret online
learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 2011.
Sabour, S., Chan, W., and Norouzi, M. Optimal comple-
tion distillation for sequence learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.01398, 2018.
Seo, M., Kembhavi, A., Farhadi, A., and Hajishirzi, H.
Bidirectional attention ﬂow for machine comprehension.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01603, 2016.
Shi, Z., Huang, X., Jain, A., and Lin, C. Applying deep
learning to the cache replacement problem. In Proceed-
ings of the International Symposium on Microarchitec-
ture, 2019.
Shi, Z., Swersky, K., Tarlow, D., Ranganathan, P., and
Hashemi, M. Learning execution through neural code fu-
sion. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2020.
Sun, W., Venkatraman, A., Gordon, G. J., Boots, B., and
Bagnell, J. A. Deeply aggrevated: Differentiable imita-
tion learning for sequential prediction. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
3309–3318, 2017.
Sze, V ., Chen, Y .-H., Yang, T.-J., and Emer, J. S. Efﬁcient
processing of deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(12):2295–2329, 2017.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Atten-
tion is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2017.
Vecerik, M., Hester, T., Scholz, J., Wang, F., Pietquin, O.,
Piot, B., Heess, N., Roth¨orl, T., Lampe, T., and Riedmiller,
M. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement
learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.
Wang, H., He, H., Alizadeh, M., and Mao, H. Learning
caching policies with subsampling. 2019.
Wu, C.-J., Jaleel, A., Hasenplaugh, W., Martonosi, M.,
Steely Jr, S. C., and Emer, J. Ship: Signature-based hit
predictor for high performance caching. InProceedings of
the International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2011.
Xu, Y ., Frachtenberg, E., Jiang, S., and Paleczny, M. Char-
acterizing Facebook’s memcached workload. IEEE Inter-
net Computing, 18(2):41–49, 2013.

--- PAGE 12 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
A. Architecture Details
Our model is implemented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019)
and is optimized with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba,
2014).
Embeddings. In the full-sized model, to embed memory
addresses and cache lines, we train a unique embedding
for each unique memory address observed during training,
sharing the same embedder across memory addresses and
cache lines. We similarly embed PCs.
Concretely, we initialize an embedding matrix Wm ∈
R(nm+1)×dm via Glorot uniform initialization (Glorot &
Bengio, 2010), where nm is set to the number of unique
memory addresses in the training set anddm is the dimen-
sion of the embedding. Then, each unique memory address
m is dynamically assigned a unique id 1 tonm, and its em-
beddinge(m) is set to the i-th row of the embedding ma-
trixWm. At test time, all memory addresses unseen during
training are mapped to a special UNK embedding, equal to
the last row ofWm. We embed PCs with a similar embed-
ding matrixWp∈ R(np+1)×dp.
Attention. After computing embeddings (with either the
full-sized model or the byte embedder) e(l1),...,e (lW )
for each line in the cache state and hidden states
[ht−H+1,...,h t] representing the pastH accesses, we com-
pute a contextgw for each cache line by attending over the
hidden states with the line embeddings as queries as follows:
1. Following Vaswani et al. (2017), we compute po-
sitional embeddings e(−H + 1),...,e (0), where
e(pos)∈ Rdpos and:
e(pos)2i = sin
( pos
100002i/dpos
)
e(pos)2i+1 = cos
( pos
100002i/dpos
)
.
We concatenate these positional embeddings with the
hidden states to encode how far in the past each access
is: [(ht−H+1;e(−H + 1)),..., (ht;e(0))]. Although
in theory, the LSTM hidden states can encode posi-
tions, we found that explicitly concatenating a posi-
tional embedding helped optimization.
2. We apply General Attention (Luong et al., 2015) with
each cache line embedding as the query and the con-
catenated hidden states and positional embeddings as
keys:
αi = softmax(e(lw)TWeht−H+i)
gw =
H∑
i=1
αiht−H+i.
The matrix We∈ Rdm×(dLSTM+dpos) is learned and
g1,...,g W can be computed in parallel (Vaswani et al.,
2017).
B. Experimental Details
B.1. Detailed Results
To provide further insight into our learned policy, we also
report results on two additional metrics:
• Top-K Accuracy: The percentage of the time that the
optimal line to evict according to Belady’s is in the
top-K lines with highest probability of eviction under
our learned policy. This indicates how frequently our
learned policy is outputting decisions like those of
Belady’s. We report top- 1 and top-5 accuracy. Note
that since each cache set in the last-level cache can
only hold 16 lines, the top-16 accuracy is 100%.
• Reuse Distance Gap: The average difference between
the reuse distance of the optimal line to evict l∗ and
the reuse distance of the line evicted by PARROT , i.e.,
dt(l∗)−dt(lw), wherew = arg maxiπ(i|st). This
metric roughly captures how sub-optimal the decision
made by PARROT is at each timestep, as evicting a line
with a smaller reuse distance is more likely to lead to a
cache miss. A policy with a reuse distance gap of 0 is
optimal, while a high reuse distance gap leads to more
cache misses.
We report results with of our full model with this metric
in Table 2. In mcf, libquantum, and lbm, our replacement
policy frequently chooses to evict the same cache line as
Belady’s with a top-1 accuracy of over 75% and a top-5 ac-
curacy close to 100%. In other programs (e.g., omnetpp,
Web Search), our replacement policy’s top-1 and top-5 ac-
curacies are signiﬁcantly lower, even though its normalized
cache hit rate in these programs is similar to its normalized
cache hit rate in mcf. Intuitively, this can occur when sev-
eral cache lines have similar reuse distances to the reuse dis-
tance of the optimal cache line, so evicting any of them is
roughly equivalent. Thus top-K accuracy is an interesting,
but imperfect metric. Note that this is the same intuition be-
hind our ranking loss, which roughly measures the relative
suboptimality of a line as a function of the suboptimality of
its reuse distance.
The differences in the reuse distance gaps between the pro-
grams emphasize the differences in the program behaviors
and roughly indicate how frequently cache lines are reused
in each program. For example, PARROT achieves wildly dif-
ferent average reuse distance gaps, while maintaining simi-
lar normalized and raw cache hit rates (Table 1) in omnetpp
and mcf, due to differences in their access patterns. In om-
netpp, evicting a line with a reuse distance 100’s of accesses
smaller than the reuse distance of the optimal line some-

--- PAGE 13 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Table 2. Mean top-1/5 accuracy and reuse distance gap ofPARROT ,
averaged over 3 seeds with single standard deviation intervals.
Program Top-1 Acc. (%) Top-5 Acc. (%) Reuse Dist. Gap
astar 17.2±1.1 50 .8±1.8 20065 .8±6433.1
bwaves 20.9±3.2 49 .1±3.0 1356 .9±653.5
bzip 21.2±0.9 44 .3±2.5 478 .1±39.5
cactusadm 91.3±1.7 98 .3±0.2 2 .0±0.1
gems 15.0±0.6 45 .5±2.4 46 .4±3.8
lbm 83.6±2.4 98 .0±0.4 2 .1±0.3
leslie3d 88.5±0.2 98 .1±0.2 1 .9±0.0
libquantum 83.2±3.9 97 .3±0.2 2 .2±0.6
mcf 75.2±0.5 87 .6±0.3 6 .4±0.4
milc 45.2±2.2 65 .6±2.3 39 .8±5.1
omnetpp 35.0±0.4 65 .1±0.4 533 .4±8.0
sphinx3 67.0±2.0 88 .4±1.9 39 .0±8.5
xalanc 40.4±2.2 93 .4±0.7 34805 .1±14760.2
Web Search 31.8±0.8 77 .5±3.6 4012 .5±413.9
times does not lead to a cache miss, as both lines may even-
tually be evicted before being reused anyway. On the other
hand, in mcf, evicting a line that is used only slightly earlier
than the optimal line more frequently leads to cache misses.
B.2. Hyperparameters
The following shows the values of all the hyperparameters
we used in all our ﬁnal experiments. We ran our ﬁnal experi-
ments with the bolded values and tuned over the non-bolded
values. These values were used in all of our ﬁnal experi-
ments, including the ablations, except the history length ex-
periments (Section 5.4), where we varied the history length
H.
• Learning rate: (0.001, 0.003)
• Address embedding dimension (dm): 64
• PC embedding dimension (dp): 64
• PC embedding vocab size (np): 5000
• Position embedding dimension (dpos): 128
• LSTM hidden size (dLSTM): 128
• Frequency of recollectingB: (5000, 10000)
• History Length (H): (20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140)
We used the same hyperparameter values in all 5 programs
(omnetpp, mcf, libq, lbm, and Web Search) we evaluated
on, where the address embedding vocab size nm was set
to the number of unique addresses seen in the train set of
each program (see Table 3). For most hyperparameters, we
selected a reasonable value and never changed it. We tuned
the rest of the hyperparameters exclusively on the validation
set of omnetpp.
B.3. Program Details
Table 3 reports the number of unique addresses and PCs
contained in the train/test splits of each program, including
the number of unique addresses and PCs in the test split
that were not in the train split. Notably, in some programs,
new addresses and PCs appear at test time, that are not
seen during training, requiring the replacement policy to
generalize.
In Table 3, we also report the total number of last-level
cache accesses collected for each of the ﬁve programs in
our 50s collection interval. These accesses were split into
the 80% train, 10% validation, and 10% test sets. Since
different programs exhibited varying levels of cacheability
at the L1 and L2 cache levels, different numbers of last-level
cache accesses resulted for each program. These varying
numbers also indicate how different programs exhibit highly
different behavior.
B.4. Randomly Chosen Cache Sets
We randomly chose 64 sets and collected accesses to those
sets on the last-level cache. The 64 randomly chosen sets
were: 6, 35, 38, 53, 67, 70, 113, 143, 157, 196, 287, 324,
332, 348, 362, 398, 406, 456, 458, 488, 497, 499, 558, 611,
718, 725, 754, 775, 793, 822, 862, 895, 928, 1062, 1086,
1101, 1102, 1137, 1144, 1175, 1210, 1211, 1223, 1237,
1268, 1308, 1342, 1348, 1353, 1424, 1437, 1456, 1574,
1599, 1604, 1662, 1683, 1782, 1789, 1812, 1905, 1940,
1967, and 1973.

--- PAGE 14 ---
An Imitation Learning Approach for Cache Replacement
Table 3. Program details in terms of the number of last-level cache accesses and unique addresses/PCs. ‘Train’ and ‘Test’ show the number
of unique addresses and PCs appearing in each domain at train and test time, whereas ‘Unseen Test’ indicates the number of addresses and
PCs appearing at test time, but not train time. The given percentages indicate what portion of all test accesses had unseen addresses or PCs.
Train Test Unseen Test
Program Cache Accesses Addresses PCs Addresses PCs Addresses PCs
astar 879,040 13,047 25 8,235 9 46 (0.6%) 0 (0%)
bwaves 2,785,280 443,662 436 209,231 155 12 (0.1%) 38 (5.8%)
bzip 3,899,840 6,086 415 3,571 28 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
cactusadm 1,759,040 298,213 243 83,046 191 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
gems 7,298,880 423,706 5,305 363,313 1,395 1 (0%) 0 (0%)
lbm 10,224,960 206,271 44 206,265 34 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
leslie3d 6,956,160 38,507 1,705 38,487 1,663 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
libquantum 4,507,200 16,394 14 16,386 5 0 (0%) 0 (0%)
mcf 4,143,360 622,142 73 81,666 67 77,608 (21.6%) 0 (0%)
milc 3,048,000 203,504 254 90,933 82 0 (0%) 2 (0.5%)
omnetpp 3,414,720 16,912 402 14,079 315 275 (0.6%) 3 (1.0%)
sphinx3 2,372,800 20,629 528 4,586 199 0 (0%) 1 (0%)
xalanc 4,714,240 15,515 217 11,600 161 507 (1%) 5 (0%)
Web Search 3,636,800 241,164 32,468 66,645 15,893 10,334 (5.3%) 948 (6%)